that we look at deep space and chemistry
of what's going on out there in in space
and the way that we usually study this
is by molecules in the gym we're now
looking really at molecules not atoms
and how those molecules in particular
we've got carbon dioxide drawn in this
lovely little cartoon here co2 and the
co2 molecule is a nice linear molecule
with the carbon in the middle but it can
go into the gym and it can bend and it
can stretch and it can stretch either
symmetrically or unsymmetrical II and
each of those actions results in it
absorbing infrared radiation at
particular frequencies whatever the
natural resonant frequency of that
movement is and so now we start using
our infrared telescopes to look at the
infrared spectrum and we can work out
what molecules are present not just what
elements are there which we do using the
visible light so the first race were
hydrogen well no surprise there water
and methane ch4 out in these giant
molecular clouds and these are all
perfectly normal and again given what we
know about the distribution of the
elements with hydrogen helium carbon and
oxygen being the four most common
elements where you wouldn't be surprised
to find that these are the molecules we
find because of course helium doesn't
form molecules it's a noble gas it
doesn't react with anything
we did find some lines that nobody could
explain for quite a long time and one of
them belongs to this interesting
character this is fly atomic hydrogen
ions you don't really get this on earth
but the normal h2 molecule can become a
ch3 with a single positive charge
associated with it and make little
triangular molecules and these produce
weird bending and stretching motions of
the triangles that produced weird
absorption lines in the infrared which
baffled scientists until just recently
actually in the last five or so years
the first papers came out managing to
make a ch3 plus in the lab and prove
that these weird lines that we were
seeing out there in our astronomical
spectra are coming from this really
rather common but molecular ion that's
out there in space and you can get this
to be stable in space because the gas is
so thin that it takes a very long time
for it to bump into anything else and we
find it difficult to make good enough
vacuums on the earth to be able to make
that happen
likewise we find all sorts of other
weird things like CH with an audio on
and c2 just diatomic carbon two carbon
atoms stuck together if you had any of
that in your lab it would soon react
with almost anything and turn into a
different molecule that's incredibly
reactive but because these molecules are
so far apart out in space they don't
collide often enough to be able to do
that so they stick around
now here's that man again fred hoyle and
Chandra his partner won't try and say
surname and they predicted all sorts of
interesting chemistry might be going on
out in these dark molecular clouds and
indeed they were able to detect
formaldehyde which is a for Moloch for
atom molecule out there in space it's
h2c oh and that's the simplest of the
organic molecules the first step on the
road to the chemistry of life so having
discovered that actually Fred wrote a
story all about an intelligent black
cloud that had evolved weighed on beyond
just some simple organic chemistry and
had become conscious and intelligent
quite a good book if you ever want a
good read but we've gotten beyond
discovered much more interesting
molecules now ethanol ordinary efile
alcohol ch3 ch2 Oh H like you would
perhaps drink you know in your gin and
tonic
we found acetone and gnats nail varnish
remover we found antifreeze ethylene
glycol out there we also found really
rather complicated molecules that are
easy to find if they're symmetrical
because it makes those stretching and
bending patterns easy to understand so
various things like coal and through
scene and pyrene and fullerenes that
sixty atom football shaped molecule
there below the word fullerenes and even
sugar the very simplest of the sugars is
the one shown at the bottom there and
that's a glycol aldehyde and that can
combine with itself and produce other
sugars like ribose and even glucose that
we obviously have in energy bars so
really getting on to finding quite a lot
of the interesting chemical
of life they say help in these cold
molecular clouds like the Horsehead
Nebula because it provides a combination
of cold dark and protected places
protected from the effects of radiation
and ultraviolet light and they're full
of a lot of these interstellar grains
the zoomed up electron micrograph of an
interstellar grain and it provides lots
of little nooks and crannies and the
molecules get into those nooks and
crannies and get trapped on the surface
and then they bump into others that have
also come in there and the surface acts
as a catalyst to make them react with
each other and so these interstellar
grains turn out to be little chemical
factories producing all kinds of
interesting molecules and sometimes the
Starlight is good for you because it can
catalyze reactions other times it can
tear them apart and so actually these
grains provide places where the unstable
molecules that would be destroyed by
ultraviolet can code away and survive
inside the nooks and crannies of these
interstellar grains the same is true
when we look at meteorites here's an
electron micrograph again of the surface
of some meteor rights an exact same
principle these can trap interesting
organic molecules in the nooks and
crannies now
the water we also looked at comets for
our point of view of them and possibly
containing interesting organic molecules
and indeed they do there's a whole range
of them across the bottom here we've got
methanol formaldehyde ethanol pathetic
acid glycols aldehydes for mac' formic
acid and urea was another one that they
discovered that's not on this chart so
quite amazing that all of these
chemicals are present in the dirty
snowballs so if the dirty snowballs hit
the earth they're going to not only
bring their water with them but all of
these or pre manufactured organic
chemicals as well
now the Rosetta mission also discovered
glycine and methylamine and ether amine
and these are the simplest of the amino
acids which you probably heard of and
there are also elements and phosphorus
and other things there as well so it's
quite a chemical soup and just the sort
of chemical soup out of which we think
that life might emerge so maybe the
whole comets delivering material to
earth isn't such a bad idea
and of course Fred Hoyle again went
further and he suggested that actually
comets might transport life and the
seeds of life in his pen sperm ear idea
and it might bring it from one solar
system to another and deliver a life -
ready fertile planets and his idea would
be that we would find life everywhere
and of course if if his idea of it all
coming from a single common origin his
right and it would all work the same way